---
title: "Eczema-protective probiotic alters infant gut microbiome functional capacity but not composition: sub-sample analysis from a RCT"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/Probiotics_in_pregnacy
excerpt: ''
date: 2018-02-14
venue: 'Beneficial microbes'
paperurl: 'https://www.wageningenacademic.com/doi/10.3920/BM2017.0191'
citation: 'Murphy, R., Morgan, X. C., Wang, X. Y., Wickens, K., Purdie, G., Fitzharris, P., ... & Tannock, G. W. (2019). Eczema-protective probiotic alters infant gut microbiome functional capacity but not composition: Sub-sample analysis from a RCT. Beneficial microbes, 10(1), 5-17.'
---

**Abstract**
Probiotic _Lactobacillus rhamnosus_ HN001 given in early life has been shown to reduce infant eczema risk, but its effect on gut microbiota development has not been quantitatively and functionally examined. The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of early life probiotic exposure on the composition and functional capacity of infant gut microbiota from birth to 2 years considering the effects of age, delivery mode, antibiotics, pets and eczema. We performed shotgun metagenomic sequencing analysis of 650 infant faecal samples, collected at birth, 3, 12, and 24 months, as part of a randomised, controlled, 3-arm trial assessing the effect of L. rhamnosus HN001, Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis HN019 supplementation on eczema development in 474 infants. There was a 50% reduced eczema risk in the HN001 probiotic group compared to placebo. Both mothers (from 35 weeks gestation until 6 months post-partum if breastfeeding) and infants (from birth to 2 years) received either a placebo or one of two probiotics, L. rhamnosus HN001 (6×109 cfu), or B. animalis subsp. lactis HN019 (9×109 cfu). L. rhamnosus HN001 probiotic supplementation was associated with increased overall glycerol-3 phosphate transport capacity and enrichment of L. rhamnosus. There were no other significant changes in infant gut microbiota composition or diversity. Increased capacity to transport glycerol-3-phosphate was positively correlated with relative abundance of L. rhamnosus. Children who developed eczema had gut microbiota with increased capacity for glycosaminoglycan degradation and flagellum assembly but had no significant differences in microbiota composition or diversity. Early life HN001 probiotic use is associated with both increased L. rhamnosus and increased infant gut microbiota functional capacity to transport glycerol-3 phosphate. The mechanistic relationship of such functional alteration in gut microbiota with reduced eczema risk and long-term health merits further investigation.
